---
title: Template Page
sub-title: Examples of building blocks that can be used to make a page
main-image: "/cat.jpg"
video-1-url: https://www.youtube.com/embed/fl1H5k3DFKk
video-1-caption: caption
image-1: "/menu_004.png"
image-1-caption: another caption
slim-image-1: "/rentstrike.jpg"
slim-image-1-caption: slim caption
double-image-1: "/30552678.jpeg"
double-image-2: "/icons/fist.png"
double-image-1-caption: head
double-image-2-caption: fist
wide-image-1: "/crowd.jpg"

---
<div id="intro-paragraph" class="paragraph col-md-8 offset-md-2" markdown=1>

Chapter II: Literature Review

In the previous chapter the case was made for a comparative-historical study of the theory and praxis of worker power/self-management in Poland and South Africa in the 1980s. It was argued despite the popularity of these notions in labour politics in both countries, in terms of content and practice, they remain highly contentious, misunderstood, and caricatured currents. Focussing on the gaps and inadequacies in scholarship on the one hand, and debates around ideology, influences, strategy, and tactics in the available literature on the other, this chapter demonstrates that both polemical and scholarly accounts are insufficient for a full understanding of either current, and makes the case for a reinvestigation of both based on primary sources.

More specifically, academic sources are prohibitively scarce, and those that are available tend to be biographical and descriptive in nature. Second, they not only contradict each other, but are often internally contradictory as well. Third, many core claims can be easily disputed by even a cursory assessment of primary sources. Fourth, and more gravely, many pieces exhibit a serious lack of understanding about the labels that they (often incorrectly) deploy, exposing the degree to which they uncritically rely on non-primary polemical accounts, very often generated by political adversaries. Lastly, a pervasive methodological nationalism – applicable to a much wider body of historical labour research and manifesting in the absence of transnational and comparative work – has left behind impoverished explanations that fail to appreciate transnational influences, flows and connections.

</div>

<div class="normal-paragraph paragraph col-md-8 offset-md-2" markdown=1>

After 1989, the subject of Solidarity was basically abandoned by Polish scholars, although it continued to attract sparse but continuous attention by Western scholars. \[Talk about the decline in labour history after the fall of the Berlin wall\]. It was only in the 20thC that it experienced a revival,4 with the European Solidarity Centre’s translation of several English-language monographs, and the publication of a synthesis in 2010 by the National Institute of Remembrance5 – the first since Holzer’s 1984 book

Were they “On the left”?

Whether Solidarność and Fosatu can be interpreted as “on the left” is disputed, especially in more polemical accounts, and the idea of worker power/self-management lies at the centre of this debate. In the case of Poland, a prominent body of work questions whether this left-right distinction is relevant at all.

**Gaps in the scholarship**

The unexpected emergence of Solidarność (a legal, yet independent, workers’ movement in a “workers’ state”) provoked a widespread recognition from Polish scholars of weaknesses in Polish and East European social sciences \[find REF\], igniting a renewed interest in explanations and origins of upsurge. Surveys were initiated (e.g. led by Mirosław Marody and Ireneusz Kremiński), and dozens of books and articles

Thirdly, most of the articles use “syndicalism” to mean an apolitical unionist stance that forgoes politics. This is very misleading _– and also inconsistent with the facts \[give some examples\]._

* _Potoczny: Bujak = vision had been shaped by the KOR’s ethos of an “independent society”, which in turn had its roots in the anarcho-syndicalism of Edward Abramowski, a Polish syndicalist._
* _Pravda: “amalgam”of adversary unionism, neo-coporatism, and syndicalism._[1](#sdfootnote1sym)
* _Some claim that self-management overall was anarchist, some claim that this was only LG?_
* _NTO = Marxist or Anarchist? Zalega and Chwedoruk._

[1](#sdfootnote1anc) Alex Pravda, “Trade Unions in East European Communist Systems: Toward Corporatism?,” _International Political Science Review / Revue Internationale de Science Politique_ 4, no. 2 (1983): 241–60.

</div>

{% include block-image.html %}

{% include block-wide-image.html %}

{% include block-slim-image.html %}

{% include block-double-image.html %}